# SamplingBalancedForests
Empirical Analysis of Political Districting Splitability via Uniform Spanning Trees in Polynomial Time by Brooke Feinberg, Scripps College Mathematics Senior Thesis 2025 

This work expands upon a result found in "Sampling Balanced Forests of Grids in Polynomial Time," that states a polynomial fraction of all uniform spanning trees (USTs) are splittable into k balanced partitions on grid graphs to real-world political districting plans. We investigate whether similar structural properties hold for the planar dual graphs of U.S. counties (cnty) and tracts (t). Using Wilson’s algorithm, we generate uniform random spanning trees and then apply an adaptation of Breadth-First Search (BFS) to assess whether the USTs can be partitioned. Our empirical findings suggest that real-world districting plans can be split into 2-balanced, connected partitions in a fraction of polynomial time. 

The cnty, t, and bg files contain counties, tracts, and block group data. In each of these notebooks, we employ Wilson's algorithm and Graph Partitioner--- a class that uses Wilson's algorithm to generare unifom random spanning trees and then employs BFS to check if the UST is splittable into 2-balanced partitions. The number of susccessful paritions required to ensure with 95% confidence our approximatiosn falls within a 25% error bound is 178 per the Gamma Bernoulli Approximation Scheme (GBAS). 

Our results highlight the potential for scalable redistricting algorithms that preserve connectivity and balance while improving computational efficiency. By bridging the gap between theoretical guarantees and practical applications, this work contributes to the broader computational redistricting community, providing empirically-driven results that advance efficient, unbiased partitioning techniques for electoral districting.  
